# GM’s Guide to Deck of Adventures

<!-- `This document could be split into 02_GMGuide_Advice and
 02_GMGuide_Crunch` -->

<!-- MarkdownTOC -->

- Introduction
- Getting Started as a Game Master
    - Making Checks
    - GM Preparation
    - Creating Your World
- Being a Deck of Adventures Game Master
    - GM Resources
    - Managing Player Resources
    - Cards
    - Resting
    - Working with Character Vulnerabilities
- Running a Session with Deck of Adventures
    - The Target Card System
    - Successes and Failures
    - Difficulty Chart
    - Fate Cards
    - Skills Breakdown
    - Contested Checks
    - Epic Events
        - How to Identify an Epic Event
        - Setting an Epic Event's Difficulty
        - Deciding the Stakes
        - An Example of an Epic Event
    - Combat
        - Initiating Combat
        - Strengths and Weaknesses
        - Setting up Combat Encounters
    - Character Types
    - Creating a Boss Encounter
        - Adversary Actions
        - House Actions
        - Boss Phases
    - Example Combat Encounter
        - Stat Blocks
- Items
    - Starting Items
    - Weapons
    - Armor
    - General Items
    - Consumable Items
    - Magic Items
    - Upgradeable Items
- Number Crunch

<!-- REMOVE TO SHOW BELOW - PENDING FURTHER DEVELOPMENT IN b2 
- Building Your World
    - What is Your World?
    - Preparing an Adventure
    - Creating NPCs
- Managing Players \(Expectations & Realities\)
- Continuing Your Journey as a Game Master

-->

<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->

## Introduction

As the Game Master (GM), your task is to bring together a group of Players and
guide them through an Adventure. An Adventure can last for a single 2-3 hour
session, or it can unfold over the course of weeks, months, or even years in
a continuous narrative. You can bring together close friends in person, or
find new friends virtually through the [Discord](https://discord.gg/2Wu6ZAb6S9).

If you’ve been a GM elsewhere and are hoping to learn about what’s different
about being a Deck of Adventures Game Master, you can skip right to[Being a
Deck of Adventures Game Master](#Being-a-Deck-of-Adventures-Game-Master). For
everyone else, or those GMs who want a refresher, we will dive into what
being a GM is all about in[Getting Started as a Game Master]
(#Getting-Started-as-a-Game-Master). 

If you or your players have questions or need a helping hand, please reach out
to the team on [Discord](https://discord.gg/2Wu6ZAb6S9) or via GitHub
issues.


## Getting Started as a Game Master

<!-- BROZ:
Needs a notes about 1. what a GM screen is, literally and metaphorically [added] 2.
checks - why this is how ppl interact with the world, why add randomness? 3.
resource management - move up from DofA specific. Flow state is achieved when
we're at the peak of our ability and met with the exact level of challenge to
fit our skills. To keep players engaged, dial in the difficulty to where
they're feeling challenged in a way that suits their play style, without
worrying about what they have left.
-->

<!-- LOCK: Added 1. GM screen, 2. Checks, 3. Difficulty in this section --> 

Game Masters (GMs) play referee and narrator in a Tabletop RPG like Deck of
Adventures (DofA). You are both the arbiter of the rules, and the
actor/playwright who brings the various scenes of the story to life and
voices the majority of the characters who populate the world. You control
when certain characters come and go, scene changes, and the narration between
scenes. You build the world, populate it with characters and history, and
then the Players walk through that world and experience it first-hand. 

GMs are responsible for preparing ahead of sessions and guiding a group of
Players through a collaborative narrative Adventure. You bring the game to
life with any type of story you can imagine. There are so many possibilities
as Game Master, and this guide is intended to help GMs develop and hone their
skills running Adventures.

There are many different approaches GMs take to this role, focusing on their
unique strengths and talents. Don't compare yourself to others, especially
those with years of experience. This craft takes years to hone, and decades
to master, but you can be a great GM within your first few sessions by
following some of the advice in this guide. The DofA Community also is
available to respond to questions and offer advice, drawing from years of
collective experience. 

You should be an impartial force in the world, controlling both allies and
enemies neutrally. The best sessions feel like everyone is working together
to complete an objective, even the GM, rather than competition between
Players and GM. This is a delicate balance, and GMs should ask for Players'
feedback. It's also a GM's responsibility to provide feedback to the Players
at the table when necessary, especially if one's play style may be a
distraction to others at the table. 

### Making Checks

As the GM, you decide when characters should make a Check when attempting an
action during an Adventure. Some actions just happen, like a character
opening an unlocked door. Other actions might require the character to
attempt a Skill Check to see if they are successful. Incorporating luck makes
Adventures feel more dynamic and exciting. 

When characters make a Check, they are drawing from their expertise
(or inexperience) with a specific Skill to see how they perform. Their
Modifier (Mod) indicates their character's expertise with a specific Skill.
Characters with high Strength would be more likely to succeed on an Athletics
Check than Characters with low Strength, though by incorporating luck a low
Strength character still has a chance to succeed on a Strength Check. 

You determine when a Check should be made, what Skill should be used, and set
the Difficulty. A Player might ask if a specific Skill could be used instead,
and it is your decision whether to allow it in the circumstance. Stepping
over a crack in the floor should not require a Check, but leaping ten feet
across a chasm would. Attempting to sneak past a sleeping guard still
requires a Stealth Check, but it should be less difficult than sneaking past
the same guard who is on high alert. 

Flow state is achieved when we are at the peak of our ability and met with the
exact level of challenge to fit our skills. To keep Players engaged, dial in
the difficulty to where they're feeling challenged in a way that suits their
play style, without worrying about what resources they have left.

### GM Preparation

As a GM, you will need to spend time outside of normal session hours working
on your Adventure. You will be the primary resource for information about the
world. Players will ask questions, and it's up to you to provide details,
even if it's improvised. It's also OK to say you don't know something, or
that you'll need to get back to them after the session. You should be open to
Player questions and ideas, and work with them to tell the story as much as
possible. Improvisation and spontaneity are two vital ingredients to a great
session, but having key moments mapped out is important to shaping the
Players' experience. 

What you prepare may not pan out perfectly, and that's part of the fun. The
Players bring their own creative agency to the table, and that can be
unpredictable. It's important not to force the Players back into a prescribed
narrative. If the Players logically lead the the session in a different
direction, go with it. The Players also may not know when story beats are
improvised, and these moments can make for the most organic and memorable Adventures. 

During a session, GMs keep some information hidden from the Players. This can
be a physical GM screen between the GM and players, or virtually with notes
and images that are not actively shared. For a physical screen you can use a
piece of cardboard or shortened tri-fold board that you can stick notes and
stat blocks onto the back of so only you can see. You choose when to share
information that might come up naturally as a result of a Check or the
narrative. Every GM has their own style of maintaining this division of what
is hidden and what is revealed.

<!-- REMOVE TO SHOW BELOW 

### Creating Your World

`MISSING`

LOCK: Moved up to new-GM per BROZ suggestion -->

## Being a Deck of Adventures Game Master

As a Deck of Adventures (DofA) Game Master (GM) you are controlling the flow
of card draws on both sides of the table. Try to balance card draws between Players and NPCs throughout a session, and make sure all Players are involved. 

### Game Master Resources

Game Masters (GMs) should have at least two decks of cards available during a
session to represent allies and enemies. More decks may be useful to
represent different groups in combat. If you only have one deck available,
split it into two 26-card decks and shuffle regularly. 

One deck of cards should be designated the *Minion Deck* and one designated
the *World Deck*. Different color card backs will help distinguish the two
throughout play. The Minion Deck is used during combat and when applying
negative Status Conditions. The World Deck is used to draw Target Cards for
NPCs, make social checks, and used for drawing a card based on a table out of
combat. Before each Combat, reshuffle the Minion Deck. You reshuffle the
World Deck when it is empty. 

Most NPCs won't stick around long enough to use a deck completely, and
therefore won't shuffle prematurely, which would invoke Lower Hand on Checks.
For the exceptional NPC, such as a Dealer or a Boss, try assigning them a
deck, if available. If unavailable, you can decide when to invoke Lower Hand
behind the GM screen.

<!--LOCK: Consider adding a link here to the Player Guide about Fatigue --> 

### Managing Player Resources

Adventures can also be designed to test different aspects of the Players and
characters. Each Player holds a single deck of 52 cards, with two Fate Cards
reserved at the beginning of play. Each character has statistics that include
total Health Points (HP), Fate Points (FP), and Armor Points (AP). Your focus during a session will be balancing the expenditure of all of these resources. 

Absolute values are low in Deck of Adventures to promote speed of play and
simplicity of calculations. With that in mind, Player controlled Dealers
start with 5 HP that scales up based on level and Vitality modifier. This
makes the max HP 21 at level 10 with a +6 Vitality modifier. Armor Points are
similarly scaled down, with a maximum of 3. Fate Points scale more extremely,
but Powers require more of them over time, making the resource stay in
balance even as it scales higher. Players will leverage all of their
resources to survive and succeed in Adventures, and it is up to the GM to
make those resources feel strained and tested.  

### Cards

Think of the Players' decks as their characters' stamina. They should get
progressively more tired throughout the day as cards are drawn for Checks and
Powers. If a Player runs out of cards between Rests, they are Fatigued and
reshuffle their deck. They make all checks at Lower Hand until they complete
a Rest. At lower levels, Players may not reach the end of their decks between
Rests to incur Lower Hand penalties. As Players level up, both the Powers
they use and the Encounters they face may require more draws, bringing them
closer to running out. Some Players will go through cards quickly, while others will be more conservative about their draws. Keep this in mind when developing Encounters and challenging different Players. 

### Resting

Health and Fate Points are also balanced by Rests. Players can take a Quick
Rest using 30 minutes of in-game time, whereas Full Rests take 8 hours of
in-game time. Depending on the Encounters they face and the resources
expended, Players may try to Rest more often. While Resting, the Players will
be regaining their HP and FP, and expending Rest Cards. When planning
Encounters that deal damage, keep these resources in mind. Try to keep
Players motivated to press on, even without full resources. They may want to
take a Quick Rest if their HP or FP drop too low, though it might not always
be possible. 

To Rest, Players will consult with the GM about whether it is feasible for
their characters to secure a 30-minute or 8-hour break uninterrupted. Players
can only use Rest Cards after a Rest has been successfully completed. If a
situation is tense, it may not always be possible to gain the benefits of a
Rest. In the event that a Rest is interrupted, it can be resumed based on the
remaining time left and extended as necessary. 

For example, a Full Rest would be easy to secure at a comfortable inn in a
major city. A temporary hiding spot in an enemy bandit camp would me much
more risky. You could use (a) a Player Stealth Check (b) an enemy Detection
Check, or (c) an Epic Event to see if the Rest is interrupted. As the GM, you
have the ultimate authority in the successful completion of a Rest. Encourage
players to work with each other to make the best decision given
circumstances.

### Working with Character Vulnerabilities

Each character can have one or two (or more) Vulnerabilities, which may have
mechanical and/or roleplay implications. GMs are highly encouraged to keep
these Vulnerabilities in mind when designing Adventures. For Players, these
are narrative seeds that can be cultivated to result in truly meaningful
moments for the Players. 

For Player Vulnerabilities with more severe mechanical consequences, or those
that could lead to dangerous situations, GMs should avoid planning too much
around this weakness. The Players should feel like their Vulnerabilities add to
the richness of the story, and are ultimately rewarded for taking on the added
challenge. A Vulnerability should result in feeling a balance of toughness
and heroism despite the odds. At its best, Vulnerabilities will inspire
characters that develop over time, intertwining with a broader narrative.

For NPCs, Vulnerabilities can add depth to an otherwise flat archetype of
merchant or farmer. Are there Vulnerabilities that can work to challenge the
values of Players? What foils can help Players flesh out their character by
disagreeing with another character. Seeing a corruptible guard might really
activate a character focused on justice. Enemy NPC Vulnerabilities also give
Players something to exploit, through deeper analysis of the world. Yes, one
Player can do consistent damage by continuing to attack, but another could
spend a turn studying movements to learn that their adversary has an injury
and can't defend against specific attacks. Perhaps an enemy has specific
values or beliefs that could be used to turn them into an ally.

## Running a Session with Deck of Adventures

### The Target Card System

As a Game Master (GM), you will set up various challenges wherein you or a
Player will draw a Target Card (TC), and the other draws against that card to
make a Check. The level of difficulty of a Check is set by the Difficulty
Range (DR), which is the distance between pip values that will still count as
a success. When thinking about the Target Card System, it may be helpful to
consider a bullseye, where the Target Card is the center of the bullseye and
the DR is the number of circles away from the bullseye you can hit and still
be successful. 

One of the initial barriers a new GM must overcome is helping the Players
understand the Target Card system. As Players get more familiar with the
system, speed of play increases, and it is then easier for them to understand
more complex mechanics. Using the [Circular TC-DR Tool](.../1_Mechanics/Circlular_TC-DR_Tool/1_Assembled.PNG) is a helpful visual
aid. 

The Target Card System is circular, so an Ace is only 1 away from both a King
and a 2. If you were aiming a Check against a Target Card of an Ace, you
could consult the below table to understand which cards would be successful
within the set DR. 

| DR   | -6  | -5  | -4  | -3  | -2  | -1  | 0   | +1  | +2  | +3  | +4  | +5  | +6  |
|---:  |:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| Card | 8   | 9   | 10  | J   | Q   | K   | A   | 2   | 3   | 4   | 5   | 6   | 7   |

### Successes and Failures

- **Successes** happen when the drawn card is within the DR. The character
    making the Check is able to accomplish what they intended, within
    reason.

- **Misses** happen when the drawn card is outside the DR. The character
    making the Check is not able to accomplish what they intended. 

- **Critical Successes** happen when the drawn card exactly matches the TC in
    pip value and suit. At 2% chance, they should feel amazing for the
    Player. Make an effort to reward these exact matches whenever possible
    with additional effects or bonuses.

- **Major Successes** happen when the drawn card matches the TC in pip value
    At 8% chance, this should feel pretty good. In Combat, a Major Success
    increases the damage of the attack by 1. Out of combat, some smaller
    bonus should happen whenever possible.

<!--LOCK: I rounded up to 2% and 8% to make it more accessible for the less
 math-minded GMs, and to match the table below -->

- **Color and Suited Successes** happen when the drawn card is within the DR
    and matches the TC in color or suit. 

- **Fate Cards**  permit a Dealer (Player character or significant NPC) to
    redraw. If this changes the success state, the first draw should be
    ignored.

### Difficulty Chart

<!--LOCK: Edited Likelihood to Difficulty for ease of GM navigation --> 

The GM sets the Difficulty for all Checks made during a session. Setting the
Difficulty Range (DR) is the GM's way of establishing how difficult something
is to accomplish. The chart below shows probability of success for the most
frequent draws at each Difficulty Range (DR). To further dial in the
difficulty, you might say that a specific check requires a Color or Suited
Success. Note that Color or Suit make success half or a quarter as likely.
Some mechanics or GM rulings can call for Checks to be made at Upper or Lower
Hand, drawing (up to) 2 or more cards, and taking the more or less beneficial
result. The final row notes the difference caused by drawing 2 cards. At DR 0
or 6, there's little difference, but it can be as much as 25% for a DR 3
check.

| DR          | 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 4   | 5   | 6    |
|------------:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:| :---:|
| Normal Draw | 8%  | 23% | 38% | 54% | 69% | 85% | 100% |
| Color Draw  | 4%  | 12% | 19% | 27% | 35% | 42% | 50%  |
| Suit Draw   | 2%  | 6%  | 10% | 13% | 17% | 21% | 25%  |
| Lower Hand 2| 1%  | 5%  | 15% | 29% | 48% | 72% | 100% |
| Upper Hand 2| 15% | 41% | 62% | 79% | 91% | 98% | 100% |
| Difference  | 7%  | 18% | 24% | 25% | 21% | 13% | NA   |

Keep this table as a handy reference for setting DRs throughout a session. Do
you want something to feel extremely difficult? Maybe make it a DR 1. Should
a Player feel like something is less challenging for their character in a
moment where the odds are in their favor? Make it a DR 3 with Upper Hand. You
decide what makes the most sense given a specific situation. 

### Player Skill Mods and DR Reporting

Players will have Modifiers (Mods) on their Character Sheet that allow them to
reduce the difficulty of Checks made in that relevant domain. To simplify
Player understanding of how modifiers work, you can explain that a Modifier
widens the DR, making it more likely their draw will be successful. In some
circumstances, having a +1 Mod may be the difference between success and
failure. 

Referencing the table above, it's clear to see the difference an additional
DR +1 can make. As you progress Players through an Adventure, keep these
Modifiers in mind when balancing Encounters and challenges. A Player with
a +3 Mod facing a DR 3 Check is an automatic success on a Normal Draw. Scale
difficulties up or down accordingly, but never punish a Player for having a
high Modifier. If it is likely their character would be able to easily
succeed on something, allow it rather than changing the Difficulty on the
spot.   

### Fate Cards

Players start with 2 Jokers as Fate Cards and will randomly gain more as they
draw their Aces. As a GM, you also reserve Fate Cards when controlling
Dealers during a session. Fate Cards are opportunities for Players and
Dealers to manipulate fate by allowing for a re-draw or avoiding damage. You
can ask if a Player would like to use a Fate Card when they Miss or when they
take damage. You can encourage Players to use these more often by giving
additional Fate Cards to reward key moments of play. This can be a great tool
for encouraging great roleplay or working together.

### Skills Breakdown

Players will want to make Checks based on their characters' strengths. Their
approach to a situation should determine the nature of a Check. As the GM,
you have the final say as to which Skill applies. Attributes are meant to be
more responsive/reactive, and are often used for Contested Checks. Skills are
intended to be more active for character-initiated events.

The list below provides of general information about the Attributes and
Skills (see [Full Players Guide](../01_PlayerGuide_Full.md#Characters) for
more info).

<!-- BROZ: Do you want links to go to github or the site? I replaced with a
relative doc link, which should work on both, not certain -->

- AGL Agility: Dodging Contested Checks, boosts Unarmored AC.
    - Finesse: Performing difficult physical actions with ease. Primary Skill
      for Martial role.
    - Stealth: Moving quietly, undetected.

- CON Conviction: Strength of character to resist harmful mental effects.
    - Bluffing: Convincing others, either truthfully or deceptively.
    - Performance: Acting under scrutiny, potentially in front of audiences.

- GUT Intuition: Gut feelings about the state of the world (e.g., truthfulness,
  supernatural knowledge)
    - Detection: Observing the world using all senses.
    - Craft: Practicing a honed trade (i.e., Medicine, Pottery, Piety).
      Primary Skill for Support role.

- INT Intelligence: Reactive critical thinking or recalling recalling explicit
  information.
    - Knowledge: Recalling and amassing knowledge at leisure. Primary Skill
      for Casters.
    - Investigation: Seeking the answer to a question or piecing together
      information.

- STR Strength: Physical limits and boundaries (e.g,. resisting a push).
    - Athletics: Exerting oneself in physical sustained challenge.
    - Brute: Burst force or single lifts. Primary Skill for Defenders. 

- VIT Vitality: Resisting bodily harm. Determines max HP.

### Contested Checks

Contested Checks are initiated when two characters attempt to accomplish
opposite goals, or one character attempts to overcome the resistance of
another (see [Full Player Guide](../01_PlayerGuide_Full.md#contested-checks) for more info).

The list below features a few examples of Contested Checks, but, as the GM,
it's up to you to decide what a situation calls for if it is not explicitly
described in the guide or in a Power mechanic.

1. Tackle Target: Initiator Finesse vs. Target Athletics 
2. Convince Target, truthfully or deceptively: Initiator Bluffing vs. Target Detection 

### Epic Events

<!-- BROZ: I think this could be revised referring back to the same example repeatedly
           the way I did for the player guide successes.
 -->

Epic Events are unique, time-gated scenarios that can occur throughout an
Adventure. As the Game Master (GM), you determine when an Epic Event will
happen, set the Difficulty, and decide the stakes. 

Epic Events invoke a specific set of rules for determining the outcome, which
is different than traditional combat, social interaction, or exploration.
These are typically very draining on Player stamina (remaining decks), and
could be a tool to engage resource management. This is also is a good way to
engage all Players in faster-paced, more free-form roleplaying. Since Players
can't make a Check two times in a row, it requires active dialogue, planning,
and participation from every Player.

As the GM, you are actively drawing against the Players on a TC during the
Epic Event. The odds are skewed in the Players' favor by allowing them to
draw using Skill Modifiers while the GM draws with a +0 Mod. Your ability to
modify the challenge of an Epic Event comes from setting the Difficulty.

For more information on Epic Events, visit the [Full Player Guide](https://github.com/DeckofAdventures/TheGame/blob/main/1_Mechanics/01_PlayerGuide_Full.md#Epic-Events)

#### How to Identify an Epic Event

<!-- BROZ: I think Epic could also be used for time skips. Do we want to first-person
           this long trek from A to B or Epic it? Or replace the 2-year gap training 
           montage
-->

Epic Events often occur within a limited time frame, typically less than a
minute, and typically no more than twice per session. This could be a fleeing
event under some thread of harm (e.g., a crumbling dungeon or an erupting
volcano), or an unexpected smaller scenario (e.g., preventing an uncontrolled
vehicle from crashing). It can cover a small scope (e.g, a moment of surprise
that begins a larger battlefield), something larger (e.g., replace an entire
combat), or even be used to shrink longer periods of time into manageable
pieces (e.g., dealing with the storms and resource management of travel
across a sea). As GM, you will get a feel for what makes for a good Epic
Event, and how to place it in your narrative to keep the session feeling
fresh and lively for all of your Players.

#### Setting an Epic Event's Difficulty

The GM sets the difficulty ahead by announcing how many Successes will be
needed before 3 Failures. Setting a difficulty of 4 means that the Players
need to make 4 successful Checks before reaching 3 failures. 

#### Deciding the Stakes

Going into an Epic Event, there is no guarantee of Success, even at lower
Difficulties. Try to balance the outcomes based on the scope of the Epic
Event. Not all Epic Events are life-or-death scenarios, and consequences can
vary depending on the number of success before 3 failures. 

If Players get 3 Failures trying to escape a collapsing dungeon, they may take
a little damage or need to discard some cards, or lose a precious object in
the fray. Likewise, if the Players are successful without any failures, the
reward for their success can be balanced accordingly. 

<!-- MISSING - a table or reference of standard success/failures + example
 stakes for certain types of scenarios --> 

#### An Example of an Epic Event

<!-- BROZ: Is this the 'classic' example? I feel like the dungeon collapse or sneaky 
           infiltration does the concept more justice bc it's something that would be
           otherwise handled by less intense skill checks, instead of combat.
 -->

<!-- LOCK: I agree - we can modify this to a more streamlined dungeon collapse--> 

The Players hear screaming ~ 100 ft away, and rush to investigate. They see a
group of townsfolk being attacked by a group of monsters. Each of the
townsfolk is engaged with a different monster. The difficulty is set to 3,
and 5 target cards are drawn. The Players then declare which skill they will
use to save one of the townsfolk, and must make a suited hit before the GM
does to succeed on each TC. 

- The Defender chooses Brute, and intends to ram into a monster while the
  townsperson gets away. The GM decides a corresponding DR of 3 on a 9 of
  Hearts Target Card (TC). The Defender draws a 6 of Hearts and, with the
  Defender's +2 to Brute, this is a Suited Success and a success on the first
  Epic Event challenge. 

- The Support wants to protect a townsperson using their magic via Craft, with
  a +1 modifier. The GM rules this more difficult, with a DR 2 on a 7 of
  Clubs TC. The Support draws a 3 of Diamonds, which is a miss. The GM then
  draws, without a modifier, against this same TC. They draw a 6 of Spades;
  also a miss. Support and GM each take turns drawing until until the Support
  draws a 5 of Clubs, which is a success. 

- The Martial wants to sneak up to a monster and help the townsperson escape,
  using Stealth. The GM sets a DR 2 on the Jack of Spades TC. The Martial
  draws first, and misses. The GM draws a King of Spades. As the GM got a
  Suited Success, this is the first failure for the Players.

- The Caster and Support both go for the fourth TC together, each with their
  primary skill modifier. The DR is set to a 3, and they each draw first,
  missing the TC. The GM draws, and misses. The Caster misses again, but uses
  a Fate Card to re-draw and draws a suited hit. This marks a 3rd success for
  the Players, which ends the Epic Event.

The Players watch as the monsters retreat, having saved the majority of the
townsfolk. Due to the one failure, one of the townsfolk has been gravely
injured and was dragged away with the monsters as they retreated. The Players
can choose to follow after the monsters or regroup with the townsfolk they
saved. This might result in a reward from the local government for saving
lives, or kick off a new Adventure that involves seeking out the monsters.

### Combat

<!-- BROZ: This feels like new-GM stuff -->

Deck of Adventures (DofA) combat is meant to be fast-paced, collaborative, and
accessible. It is designed around a simple core, while allowing for a lot of
player freedom based on how they built their character. To run combat in DofA
successfully, you should plan encounters thoughtfully and be able to adapt on
the fly when Players make unexpected strategic decisions. 

Some sessions may be very focused on combat, with 3-4 combat encounters
between Full Rests, while others will be more roleplay-oriented. As the Game
Master (GM), you decide what mix is best for your table. Some Players may be
more interested in combat, while others get excited and engaged with good
social roleplay, and it is up to you as the GM to balance the interests of
the Players at the table.

#### Initiating Combat

You choose when to declare the beginning of Combat, and this triggers the
start of Combat Turn Order. The start depends entirely on the scenario. It
might begin when the Players decide to attack an enemy, or when an enemy
decides to attack the Players. 

To determine Turn Order, every Player will draw a Target Card for themselves.
As the GM, you will draw a TC for each Minion and Dealer involved in the
Encounter, including any new enemies that appear throughout Combat. To
simplify, a group of Minions might have a single TC, but a Dealer must always
have their own TC.

#### Strengths and Weaknesses

There are ways to build encounters that allow the Players to highlight their
character's strengths or Vulnerabilities. If a Player recently took a new
Power, you might build an encounter to give them a chance to shine. A new
area of effect Power would be feel great to deploy on a swarm of smaller
enemies. If a Player has the Wanted Vulnerability, you might introduce the
faction hunting them, who might approach the Players as hostile. Can the
Players talk their way out of the situation, or will they choose to fight?

<!-- BROZ Move up to new-GM  -->

<!-- LOCK: If we keep it all new-GM vs. DofA specific we'll lose some of the 'section' based value of the GM guide. Talking through combat more holistically is helpful here - do we strip it out entirely from DofA specific and make 'Combat' its own main section? --> 

#### Setting up Combat Encounters

You decide what types of Combat Encounters you want to run during a session.
Players could be matched against a single strong foe. Many smaller enemies
might have the players torn in different directions. A single Dealer with
supporting Minions might have interesting interaction effects, where one
gains benefits in the presence of the other.

GMs should try to include a mix of roleplay and combat in an Adventure, when
possible. Storming an enemy fortress may result in several Combat Encounters
back to back. Investigating a crime in a major city may have more social
investigation-based with relatively little combat.

<!-- BROZ Move up to new-GM  -->

### Character Types

- **Minions** are enemies that are weaker than the Players. They often have
    lower HP, and cannot take Powers or Vulnerabilities. They do not have
    access to Fate Cards, and draw from a single GM deck.

- **Dealers** are just as powerful as, or more powerful than, the Players.
    They have a name, and experience that would lend them power. GMs
    might draw from a separate deck of cards for each Dealer. Each starts
    with one Fate Card, and reserves Aces when drawn. Dealers can also take
    Powers and Vulnerabilities, and may possess items. See below for how to
    turn a Dealer into a Boss. 

- **Bystanders** are allied or neutral characters that exist throughout the
    world, as anything from a store owner to noble ambassador. These
    characters are typically on par in power with Minions, and may be
    persuaded to join Players in combat as Companions or GM controlled
    Dealers.

<!-- BROZ: Do we Bystander distinction? Can't an NPC be either Dealer, Minion
 or Companion, and join players in combat accordingly? -->

<!-- LOCK: Bystander to me is our stand-in for "Allied NPC", whereas a Minion is an enemy term and Companion is a Player Controlled character. I don't like the term "NPC" when talking to GMs who are literally playing the characters, so I feel like using Bystander and Minion/Dealer as GM controlled character terms is more useful here. -->

- **Companions** are Player-controlled creatures who can be commanded with an
    Action. Players can invest in Powers to make their Companion more
    powerful. A GM might also grant a temporary Companion as part of an
    Adventure, potentially as a result of a Check, or an exchange for other
    money or items. 

- **Bosses** are even more powerful than Dealers, and gain the following
    benefits: Adversary Actions, House Actions, and Phases. 

### Creating a Boss Encounter

Boss Encounters are best saved for the end of Adventures, as a culmination of
the the story thus far. As the GM, you choose what Actions they have access to.

#### Adversary Actions

An Adversary Action is a Boss ability that takes place outside their turn
during Combat to help balance encounters where a single Boss might be facing
up to 6 Players. This helps Players feel a sense of danger from a single
enemy. Adversary Actions may be related to resource replenishment, like
allowing a Boss to recover a small amount of HP or gain Fate Points. They may
allow for an additional attack, or an environmental effect involving a Check
for the Players. Players who fail might take damage or receive a Status
Condition like Entangled. 

For example, a poisonous monster would have the following Adversary Action: 
*Acid Splash*. A cloud of acid appears in a 4 space cube. Any creature inside
 the cube at the start of their turn makes a DR 3 Agility Check or take 2
 damage. On a success, 1 damage.

#### House Actions

House Actions take place when a Boss is in their home or base of operations.
Once initiated, they happen at the beginning of every round of combat. This
is a great way to add in dynamic elements to an encounter, such as new
enemies appearing or the environment becoming more dangerous.

#### Boss Phases

Dealers often have < 10 HP. For balance, Boss Encounters can have multiple
Phases. After running out of HP, they replenish and changes their approach.
Every time a Boss enters a new Phase, draw a new TC for them. The following
list features a number of examples that might be triggered by a new Phase:

<!-- BROZ: Why draw new TC -->

<!-- LOCK: I pictured a 5 phase boss fight. The Players have made great progress on the Boss' HP, but if they've been aiming at the same TC for the last 10 rounds of combat they are going to be way less likely to keep hitting. Drawing a new TC for each Phase keeps the odds fresh and prevents a Player from feeling like they 'wasted' a card that would have been a hit during Boss fights. -->

- Boss escapes to another location 
- Boss summons Minions 
- Boss alters the environment to make certain areas 
    + cause damage (e.g., erupting flame)
    + require a check (e.g,. Agility check to stay standing ice) 
- Boss disappears, and reappears
    - when Minions have been defeated 
    - after a set number of rounds 
    - after an environmental effect dissipates 
- Boss changes features like
    + core stats
    + higher or lower AR
    + drawing with Upper Hand (e.g., putting in more effort)
    + drawing with Lower Hand (e.g., getting angry/sloppy)

### Example Combat Encounter designed for 4 Players at Level 2

<!-- BROZ: New GM stuff -->
In a longer campaign, mix up the types of encounters to see how Players react
and interact with each other. This will keep things fresh so combat keeps
Players engaged over time.

Here, the context is kept purposefully blank to fill in with your setting.

**Location.** Start with a wide open space for the Players and enemies to move
  around in, between 10-20 spaces across to allow for movement and let the range influence Player tactics. 

**Setup.** Add 4 Minions close to the entrance and 1 Dealer farther away. 2
  Minions are melee guards and 2 are shooters 3-5 spaces away, to force the
  Players to choose their targets and allow space between each enemy. The
  Players will need to deal with the Minions first in order to reach the
  Dealer, allowing the Dealer to use their abilities in the first 2+ rounds. 

#### Stat Blocks

**Dealer: Captain**

- HP: 5
- AR: 2 (Lightly armored)
- FP: 2
- Skill Modifiers: Agi +2, Str +2, Vit +2
- Passives: Multiattack, the Dealer can make two attacks on its turn. Lucky,
  on a suited miss the Dealer can make one free redraw. 
- Vulnerabilities: Eye for an Eye, if you attack in combat, you must target
  the enemy who hit you most recently.
- Actions: 
  - Major Actions: 
    1. Attack, Melee, +2 to hit, 1 space range, single target. On
    a successful hit, deal 1 damage. 
    2. Attack, Ranged, +1 to hit, 10 space
    range, single target. On a successful hit, deal 1 damage. 
  - Minor Actions: 
    1. Speed Boost, double the Dealer's movement. 
  - Adversary Actions: 
    1. Break Stun, when the Dealer is stunned, as an Adversary
    Action they can end the stun. This can only be done once per round.
    2. Command Minions, the Dealer commands one Minion to attack. The targeted
    Minion can move up to 3 spaces and take one Major Action. 

**Minions 1 + 2: Melee Guards**

- HP: 2
- AP: 1
- AR: 2 (Lightly armored) 
- Skill Modifiers: Agi +1, Str +1, Vit +1 
- Major Actions: 
  1. Attack, Melee, +1 to hit, 1 space range, single target. On a
  successful hit, deal 1 damage.
- Minor Actions: 
  2. Protect, adds 1 AP (up to a maximum of 1).  

**Minions 3 + 4: Ranged Shooters**
- HP: 2
- AR: 3 (Unarmored)
- Skill Modifiers: Agi +1, Gut +1, Int +1
- Major Actions: 
  1. Attack, Ranged, +1 to hit, 10 space range, single target. On a
  successful hit, deal 1 damage.
- Minor Actions: 
  1. Ready Aim, focuses attention on a single target. While that
  target is in range, draw attacks with the Upper Hand. 

## Items

### Starting Items

All characters start with a basic set of items, depending on their choices
made at Character Creation. This may be setting dependent, and some settings
may have access to items that other settings do not. A high fantasy campaign
may start characters with a magical item, while others may simply start the
characters with a standard weapon and armor. Determine what makes the most
sense for your world.

The general starting items in Deck of Adventures include a standard weapon,
simple armor, an Adventuring Pack, and a Trinket. 

**Adventuring Pack** contains the following:
- 1 bed roll
- 1 rations kit (contains 10 rations)
- 5 torches
- 1 flint & tinder

**Trinket** are simple items that are part of a character's back story. These
  are something usually low in monetary value that are meaningful to the
  character. Some examples might include: 
- a small statue
- a bauble from childhood
- a broken dagger
- a worn painting or image
- an old letter 

### Weapons

Weapons are the primary way a character is able to deal damage in combat. The
quality of that weapon determines how much damage it will deal when making a
successful attack. See the below table for a general reference on Weapon
Quality.

**Weapon Quality Table**

| Damage | Descriptor |
| ------ | ---------- |
| 1      | Standard   |
| 2      | Improved   |
| 3      | Heroic     |
| 4      | Legendary  |

Some weapons can have additional effects granted while wielding them, such as
modifying damage on a Suited Hit or granting additional effects on a Major
Success. 

Characters with high quality weapons are able to deal damage quickly, so keep
this in mind when balancing Encounters or granting Players loot as they Level
Up.  

### Armor

### General Items

### Consumable Items

### Magic Items

### Upgradeable Items

<!-- LOCK: We could move the above example encounter elsewhere, or have a different
 document entirely for GM resources or reference materials that we could
 include here instead.--> 

<!-- LOCK: Commenting out hidden sections, remove to show below 

## Building Your World

### What is Your World?

`MISSING`

### Preparing an Adventure

- Different length of Adventures: One Shots, Multi-Shots, Campaigns
- Different types of Adventures: Combat, investigation, contracts,
  negotiations, etc. 
- Railroad vs. Sandbox

### Creating NPCs

- Social encounters, Bystanders 

- Enemy types: Dealers and Minions 

<!-- Other sections to build out 

- Leveling up: XP vs. Milestones
- Giving Players items and balancing Power creep
- How to get Players to contribute to the World
- Leveraging Player backstories 
- Developing Lore and background information 
- Managing an increasingly complex World

--> 

<!-- REMOVE TO SHOW BELOW

## Managing Players (Expectations & Realities)

`MISSING`

<!-- LOCK: It would be good to get different opinions here and maybe seek community
 feedback for this section --> 

<!--
- Bringing Players together
- The importance of Session 0 - establishing a safe space
- United at the table
- Creating an open and safe space for your Players
- Understanding Player motivations and preferences 
- Keeping Players engaged
- Mitigating conflict - in and out of session 
- How to manage an Evil character at the table 
--> 

<!-- REMOVE TO SHOW BELOW
## Number Crunch

`MISSING`

<!--

- General numbers on resources like FP/HP/AP/Stamina
- Making stat decisions for your NPCs
- Balancing encounters (Difficulty Challenge Formula or advice)
- Scaling damage over time 
- Item lists or general descriptions/tables (see Issue #33)

-->

<!-- REMOVE TO SHOW BELOW

## Continuing Your Journey as a Game Master

`MISSING`

<!-- 

This section will contain some more advanced aspects of being a Game Master. 

- Balancing higher level encounters
- Further leveraging player motivations and back story in a narrative
- Supporting Player and character growth and development 
- Building a continuous Adventure that sustains over time as a full Campaign
- Resuming a Campaign after a long break (it's OK - it happens)
- Seeking help from the community 

--> 
